put
on excuse can't hear you many people are
talking okay thank you very much you're
welcome okay the board of Selectmen will
conduct a public hearing to receive
public input on proposed revisions of
the charter of the town of Andover set
forth from the draft report of the
charter revision
commission we're now going to receive
public input who wants to go
first Don
I'll go
first so I do not support or agree on
this new chart of revision and I I will
oppose it as best I'm able in particular
section 10 5H the minor
ordinance section 402a the general
powers of the board of
Selectmen in section 301a which is again
with the ordinance and in section 702
which is the town
cour uh I'll go down my list Section 105
is the minor ordinance the elimination
of this section removes obviously the
public hearing and gives the power to
enact all ordinances to the board of
selected I view this as an assault on
our democracy by taking away the public
views and taking away our decision
making giving it to five people this
section should be restored to its
original
content government by the people for the
people two section 402 labeled General
powers and
duties the word Powers should be
removed we are in power with with the
taxpayer with the citizens with the
voters we should have the power section
A and B should be restored to the
original text the power needs to remain
with the people the taxpayers and
citizens of Ander were not the five
select I've attended almost every town
budget meeting since I've moved here 30
years ago and most public hearings and I
support the current process it does not
need to be f next attendance can be can
vary depending on the issues but those
who make the effort to come to the
meetings know that they have an
opportunity to
speak on a particular ordinance or in a
particular Town budget line
item take a breath town clerk this has
always been an elective position and I
feel strongly should remain that way the
town has been blessed with Marge and
Carol but a four-year appointed position
by the current five Selectmen is
unwarranted and unnecessary and and I
would truly like to know why the Char of
vision committee or and over people
think kind needs to be
changed I believe that the tax collector
and the assessor are appointed are
appointed as well but I don't see that
they have to be reappointed in four
years is that correct first lik do you
you know that answer that I I can what
the Char commission is trying to do is
trying to make the town clerk's position
more like the town administrator's
position because in the situation where
you're voting for an individual such as
Carol Lee we know what we're getting
sure but the issue is when Carol Lees us
what are we doing well I'm I'm confident
that when Carol reaches a mandatory
retirement of age of
80 minimum
minimum qualified people will step
forward
um the charter revision needs to be
Revisited this stands as a power grab
and our how our town government is Opera
for
decades we should have a voice and a
vote on all Town ordinances and they
should be presented at a public hearing
the board of Selectmen does not need any
more power than it already has our town
clerk position should remain the elected
position thank you
[Applause]
all right so
um most of you who know us know that is
very very rare that Don dley I agree on
it either pigs pigs are flying yeah pigs
are flying exactly um so um I I have
pretty much the same complaints same
objections I'm sorry Scott so Boston
Hill Road um so I have pretty much the
same objections um I think it's a power
grab I think that we need to keep the
Democracy in town the the small town
Town meaning style democracy um if we
lose it we're never going back I think
it's been a it's not been perfect it's
it's messy it's ugly but it's important
um and then I feel the same about
Carol's position I also at the last
hearing brought up a bunch of technical
things about the charter and a couple of
them got changed but sever of them are
still there so this is I think a massive
a charter there's typos there's um they
got to think um you mentioned uh
105h um well that's this 105 is the
section on definitions and they've got
something there it's totally not a
definition um the uh I think it's a har
process I think that was part of the
problem I've got a bunch of others um
and I will give you guys copies of my
notes again
um what else
um in in one section we have it says
something like the board of Selectmen
shall have legislative Authority for all
matters not specifically enumerated here
and after in section
304 including but not limited to all
those Powers whatever so basically we're
saying we're referring to this other
section was saying we have those but the
section no longer applies but we're
going to keep the section there so they
fixed it at this time by taking out that
section all together so now we have
language that says that we're referring
to this section that doesn't even exist
um so I and I think I I think it's a
sign of a hurry process um I wonder why
it was done during summertime if they
thought there was less chance of people
showing up and responding or if it was
just as as they said um you know this
needs to be done for so we can get it on
a presidential ballot um which which is
a legitimate thing but I think we should
have started it much early if that was a
concern
um and a couple other there several
other um minor things they fixed the
other one that that really worried me
where they tried to assert um authority
over the local school boards grants um
that's that's been removed and I'm glad
to see that but awful lot of that hasn't
been removed and an awful lot of stuff
is
just power grabbing don't say
enough that's there's my notes
um I I think that we should as kind of a
board should table this or only do the
mo the least controversial things
changing the dates of vote and things
like that bring that to referendum
that's fine um and then try this again
with more time
H okay thank
[Applause]
you these two guys are a hard act to
follow I'm Jerry for May I live at a
away um I'm here for a reason this
evening I want to share my thoughts with
you you about the charter rision
commission's recommendation for changes
in our town Charter and also I'm
learning things from listening to other
people
here um anytime I go to a town
meeting that
involves spending of money approving
this a
$250,000 one mower
whatever I learned by listening to other
people I learned by the questions you
ask and the answers you
yet um so that's why I'm here and I
wrote this out for myself I'm ad living
it uh sometimes change is necessary I
think you're being proactive to want to
come up with a plan what happens
in she is she's not an easy person to
place she loves this town she gives her
heart and soul into it and it's good
that you're going to get ready for when
she wants to retire you you're not going
to
so I don't have the
answer what I would start with is
talking to Carol Le and say Carol how
would you go about doing
this and and interview other talents go
ask worked
out um so sometimes change is
necessary but many times it's
not our budget
procedures I think work well
you've got a framework in place why
change it if the needs to be
changed um youve probably heard it many
times if it ain't broke don't fix
it uh changes come with their CH uh
changes come with their own sets of pros
and cons in order to determine the
impact of the changes time will
analyzing is
necessary as a resident I feel as though
the
town flew through this start revision
commission and they were
rushed rushed to get something to
produce quickly so that it could meet
the November election
day um people need time to analyze
things and come up with what how do I
feel about
this um we have to process those changes
and we have
to think about the implications of
them and that's why I like get in here
with you tonight because I'm Lear a lot
of things from other
people and and over the town meeting is
our legislative body our residents
attend Town meetings and vote who votes
count it doesn't matter whether I say
yes and everybody says no or somebody
says no and everybody says yes that
doesn't matter what matters is I'm
getting a chance to
explore and put myself in other people's
places in other people's
shoes um I believe that any time you
call for a town meeting to make a
decision or put an item out to
referendum Town residents are much
closer to being in control of what they
want for their Town people have had the
chance to share their thoughts and ideas
or rather have a vote of 50 to
75 res residents taken at a town meeting
as opposed to the no F do you wi or any
of your board as opposed to having the
voice of just five select persons
as a residents think about the revision
suggested by the charter review
commission they should ask themselves
this
question how does this recommended
change impact my ability to have a say
in my local
government is this change
needed what are the advantages of this
change and what are the
disadvantages that being said we would
like to thank all the individuals who
worked tirelessly on the charter
revision commission you volunteered your
time for many hours to serve the Endo
community in this way for that I'm truly
[Applause]
thankful hi I'm Bob hurger live on
shotty Mill Road um I volunteered and
served on the charter review Comm
and in fact I was uh flattered that they
chose me to cheer the commission so I
wanted to just provide a little bit of
insight I have nothing prepared I didn't
really expect to speak tonight but I
feel compelled to say a few things just
to give a little bit of insight onto how
we how we put all of this together um as
chair I tried as much as possible to be
as nonpartisan as possible I didn't want
to steer the outcome I just wanted to
try to Shepherd the process and let the
process work as its designed we had
seven members my vote was just one of
them and as I said I tried to stay as as
center of the road and neutral as
possible um I agree that uh when things
don't need to be changed they shouldn't
be changed um as far as the process
being rushed you should know that the
initial list of items that we had was
almost twice as long as the list that we
actually decided to deliberate on some
things we decided were too complex we
not important enough um and that we
didn't have time to be able to give them
any type of appropriate consideration
and so the answer to those was we'll
talk about those in the next cycle um of
the things that we that we did settle on
the one thing that I want to give a
little bit more insight into is uh Carol
and the town clerk as as Jeff mentioned
um we wanted we we know that that she is
very strong candidate that that she has
served the town tirelessly eventually
she she's going to retire um one of the
big advantages of having an appointed
position like uh like Eric's is that we
don't we aren't restricted to someone
who lives here in town and one of the
things that we've seen time again with
the various boards and commissions that
we have in town is that we have trouble
finding people who are qualified and
willing and able and that one change of
making it appointed versus elected
allows us to expand where we can look
and I think that's that's an important
distinction um there's a lot of other
things I could talk about if I was
prepared but I just wanted to add those
things to the conversation thanks so so
Bob can I ask you a question sure now
the charter revision committee um is it
accurate to say that one of the things
on their agenda initially was to
eliminate the town
meeting no no no
that that conspiracy theory yes no that
subject as you have just framed it never
came up never came up never came to
eliminate the town meeting no absolutely
not now as you as you pointed out there
are certain parts of the process where
it would be where we're proposing that
it not be included as it is included now
but the elimination of the town meeting
in its entirety no absolutely was never
discussed in any Conta so you're just
going to like you talk about maybe
triming it back some yes yes in the sake
for the sake of efficiency in a lot of
cases that's how it spring saving money
man efficiency saving money two terms
out yeah yeah I think that's probably a
fair fair way to to frame it yeah
well
believe thank you than okay any other
questions while I'm up
here hi
yes um about your question about the
town meeting I think it's not the town
meeting that was is being eliminated
it's the vote at the town meeting is
that correct like for the town people
that show up at that town meeting to
vote in support of the uh budget is that
correct the to meeting will continue in
the exact same way can you can reduce
the budget you get to ask any questions
you get to vote on budget reductions
we're not voting to move the budget
forward or against it's not an up or
down what it is is you make decisions to
reduce the budget and then that budget
goes directly to the
referend so right now the way that the
town meeting works is the 40 or 50
people that show up here come to a town
meeting and we all raise our hand and we
talk about how our budget's too high and
then we have the potential to sit there
and make a motion to lower a budget item
are either accepted or rejected and at
the end of the meeting we vote the
budget up or down yes or no and then at
a yes or no vote it goes direct the only
thing that we we're attempting to do
which goes into all of the other issues
that we would want to address is
consolidating the budget referendum date
with the ram date so we go to a onetime
referendum to vote both on RAM and the
town budget at the same time the first
month it can fail the ram budget can
fail the town budget can fit and then we
have to go through the process again but
the only thing that we sat there and did
from a financial standpoint other than
we did make adjustments to uh raise or
uh raise some of the thresholds that
were app like right now we have a $2500
threshold on a Town grant that Eric
can't in the current Char we're not even
supposed to apply for a grant unless we
go to a town meeting and get it's
incredibly inefficient so what we did is
is there's some percentages up and down
some dollars com but everything goes to
a
reference thank you Scott with the
exception of ordinances that that's a
change I me I know there's petition
process petition process which you can
force anything to a referendum the board
of selectman is not an nonent
organization that's going to make these
these ordinances where you feel if you
disagree with an ordinance it's easier
to change to get the ordinance on a
referendum ballot than it is to get
everybody organized who come to a
meeting and sit here it's 50 signatures
it's not a lot you know so if we read it
it's it's efficiency issue it has
nothing to do with power or attempting
to to user the authority of the vote of
this the voter will still vote on it if
they choose
to thank you
[Applause]
this Charter
revision passes a referendum okay we
will not be able to have significant
input in a public hearing on any
ordinance okay so our first s we can say
got go collect 50 50 I would rather help
fund the public hearing where we' seen
many or is the public most of them disre
through but we should be able to sit
here have them present it and then vote
on it we all want to go out and click 50
50 signatures so we have a process we've
always had here for the last 30 or 40
years that I've been here I know I don't
so the the
orance okay they want these or the
selectman want to be able to take over
and enact ordinances and then if you
disagree you got to them with with a
petition and 50 signatures in a process
it's not just easy it's not easy to
do
second Town attorney Den yes there has
to be a public hearing for any
ordinance board s brings up the
difference is it's not a town meeting
but they would hold a public hearing so
you have a public hearing you have an
opportunity to talk to them you know and
if you don't trust them fine you know do
the town meeting but frankly
you know how many voters do you have in
town 2,000 how many people show up at
the town meeting it 50 it vares depends
on the well you had a good turnout
tonight pretty good turnout
Still Still you're allowing 50 people to
make a decision well supposed to five
people make a decision but they were
elected by the by the rest of the Town
by the by the whole
electorate between representative
government and town meeting this is this
is a public hearing to express I won I
won't go the issue is the issue is that
any ordinance that gets put up front the
board of select any Board of SEL puts up
front has to have a public hearing it
has to go through the resident then it
sits there and it goes through a
different process than it currently does
that is what's being recommended anyone
else anyone different want speak not no
no no no different as an individual
different
come back at the
end
summarize I always preface my statements
with I'm on the Block every only lived
in three years my concern was like um
Scott said about
105 body your name Susan C I apologize
Susan camar Senor
driver representative I don't know what
else I do around um
j3 anyway I agree with Scott about
Section 105 definitions that totally
limitated that definition for
that phrase minor ordinance there was no
such definition left after you cross
everything on and back to the election
of the town
clerk again two three years this is a
different board when it was here three
years ago so elections work so Carol I
don't
think was forced to we St her put
herself forward for election I don't
think anybody was forced to not post her
every election I again haven't been here
for very long so she could have been
voted out of that spot 20 years ago 5
years ago 10 years ago so what
difference does it make if Carol leaves
or Carol doesn't
leave somebody in this town should be
able to take off that position or we
could just say we
can appoint the board we maybe have
better smarter people outside of the
town bover to be on the board if that's
what you're saying we a better smarter
person that lives in the town over be
the
town it's not very El but
that's and I have a question just really
quick what actually is the difference
between public me public here in the
meeting
V it's the way it's coming ACR as you
got got C to meeting you vote public
hearing you don't they vote that's an
important okay thank you um oh I'm sorry
Catherine mcal Lewis um o f Ro and over
Connecticut um all right I have a couple
of things as far as the minor ordinance
and Section 105 again I agree I can't
believe that I'm going to agree with
doley I
do I'm probably have to f after this
up
okay didn't get that one that's fine um
we never have and we still do not have a
actual definition for What a minor
ordinance is and that's always bothered
me so I really wish that we could come
up with a minor ordinance definition and
as far as having changing it so that the
board is allowed to amend repeal leave
whatever they want to do without
actually having a time does bother me um
and it's not at all that I don't trust
this board I like everybody on this
board I trust everyone on this board I
just think that I don't want to take the
authority of a town meeting away from
its people of the Town that's what it's
stable that is what we've always done in
New England and that's the way I'd like
to keep it um and also I think you
should just for a few things like I had
an example that if you wanted to if this
board wanted to I would think change the
taxes to be collected anually or by
anual whatever you would be able to do
that if the should be able to do that we
would not be able to go around is that
corre
that's not correct because if we did
that you would get 50 signatures and go
to referendum and you vot it no if you
get if we are able to go God who can't
get 50 signatures you know you can get
50 signat some people don't even want to
knock door the door why would you want
to make us go through that why do I not
make you want to come here for a town
meeting we haven't done a tremendous
number there are been a lot of things
that the boards in the last four years
have wanted to do and we've off because
we have not wanted to drag everyone to a
public meeting that's why when we have
had public meetings we've had six or
seven things on the agenda to go through
iagree with that but I also I but I
don't believe that it's right to ask
change the petition process do something
like that then because I don't I don't
disagree that we shouldn't be handr by
the fact that you need a room full of
people I agree with that and I agree
that we should progress and do different
things I really do but I don't believe
that the process should be our only
choices now to walk door to door in your
signatures okay okay um the town clerk I
think the major difference between
appointed and elected and everybody
should know this is that as an appointed
no you do not have to be a town resident
which is not necessarily a bad thing um
elected you must be I don't see the
issue either way I'm not opposed or I
just feel that either way if we were
going to do it correctly then Carol
would be the person that would have to
at least make sure that next person is
qualified and can do their job and then
you have a a um sucession thanks you
have a plan in place and what her Duties
are so that the next person can step in
and go forward whether you're appointed
or elected you should be able to do that
um the next thing and I'm I don't have a
lot uh I again like with Section uh 301
in general it's basically saying that
you're taking away command or residents
to vote in to meeting and giving it to
the board
of um and
the oh again right now I think it is
ridiculous that it's on the uh Charter
that you don't spend $2,500 or whatever
that's in this day in Agia that's crazy
I don't know if I think it's okay to up
it to
50,000 without a town meeting but I do
agree that 2500 is
bizarre and
um let's see if I have anything else I
want to
say
um I think I might be believe it or
not oh the only other thing was that on
Section uh B of finance and Taxation it
says that the boards now the agencies
and Boards whatever are going to be
given their um
their budgets to the town manager rather
than the board of finance and I didn't
understand why you would want to do that
so I would like to have that explained
since I believe that's part of the board
of Finance D function and not Town manag
function and what does that do how does
that change the the board of Finance um
and does the process at
all and I think that's
it I think that's it thank you
[Applause]
town clerk when someone's elected to the
office of the town clerk are there
standards or test uh certific
certifications
qualifications before they can run like
how do you verify the person's you know
qualified for the position before they
run so I can answer that you don't have
to be qualified to run any elector in
the B over can run for town clerk um
there is a multi-year process to become
a qualified town clerk but you can hold
the position without being a qualified
town clerk ideally if that's the case
the assistant clerk would be the
qualified town clerk a town can work
with either a fully trained and
certified assistant or a fully trained
and certified town clerk um it's been a
lot of years since we've had an
assistant town clerk that was fully
certified um certainly not in my tenure
so uh and the current assistant town
clerk is not certified nor is she an
Andover resident so even though she's
probably the most qualified person to
take Carol's job she would be unable
under our current system because she is
not uh currently residing in and now she
could choose to move to hand over but I
don't think she intends to do that um so
the advantage there's advantages and
disadvantages to both being elected and
appointed um the advantage to being
appointed is that you have a much wider
pool to choose from um instead of
picking one person out of roughly 2500
adults you know you have an entire State
and you can poach a
qualified assistant town clerk that's
been certified from another town which
is what most larger municipalities do um
hasn't happened a long time because
we've been very fortunate that Carol has
done this job for you know 26 or 27
years um
cly what
surrounding col um I know Statewide it's
roughly 5050 elected versus appointed so
it's just a different you know we we
have struggled to fill the position of
assistant town clerk um pretty
consistently um and it's been kind of a
revolving
door um hopefully we're stable at that
position right now but there you know so
I'm not saying one is necessarily better
than the other but I think for a small
town to be sure you're going to find
somebody that's a competent town clerk
you know it's guarantee that's for sure
but if a town clerk is appointed that
town clerk is not an autonomous person
anymore right that town clerk director
to town
manager uh well I'm a Town Administrator
not a town manager sorry yes that person
would but remember that the thing that
regulates the action of the town clerk
is State Statute far more than the
individual towns I mean carols is
beholden to state law far more than Town
ordinances or anything else but that's
state law not Town
politics just to look at that
okay let someone speak who has he spoke
okay um just something that hasn't been
enumerated before this group and I'm not
sure if it's clear or not uh with regard
to the the charter revision
we're not intending this to be an all or
nothing kind of thing we intend there to
be six or seven different line items on
the ballot in November Each of which
encompasses the different concepts that
we're bringing here there are several
different concepts that have been
introduced such as the budgetary
thresholds or the town clerk or the
minor ordinances and all of these things
are going to be put together as separate
line items so we don't have to vote yet
yes or no on the entire thing we're
going to be able to vote these
individual items up or down as you see
fit that's the first thing I wanted to
mention and my apologies for coming here
and speaking extemporaneously but this
is just how it how it works um with
regard to Carol and the town clerk's
position car was on is on the uh Charter
review commission and and this is a
matter of public record if you watch the
videos or look at the transcripts you
can see what I'm about to to say here
which is that at the beginning of the
process she opposed the uh change to an
appointed position and as discussion and
debate and various things were
introduced she actually changed her mind
and she endorses the idea of an
appointed position right now just for
the
record well she voted yes for it we all
say that she is in favor she voted yes
on the charter rision commission to move
that forward okay how she votes her
her first of all my talk with Carol was
that she was remain studiously um
uncommitted about this she I mean she
told me that she told me she was not
going to make any um any points I
thought she was going to vote on on that
measure either but I'm not sure if that
happened or not but the question I
really wanted to ask and probably for
um the process thing do you guys realize
that this document that you're looking
at is not on the time website I at noon
today I called the town clerk got the
assistant Clerk and she emailed it to me
but
which the U the the okay the change is
from July 17th um the latest version you
guys are working with the the the July
8th one is on the on the
website that is something that we have
to discuss with the Tom clerk okay so
Tom clerk who also in Bob's absence was
the chair
of the charter review commission had all
the documents all those documents were
supposed to be submitted to the
assistant to the administrator and they
should have been online they're not I
apologize it's in office
anyway I just have a quick question
because I don't know if this would make
it a win-win or not can the petition
process be
changed can the petition proction
process it can be if we voted back to to
the Char rision
commission cuz I just thought at least
then it would take care of people's
anxiety about having to go get 50
signatures which doesn't seem like a lot
to you but when the last time you went
out did to
door I I know the DTC if they would like
to get 50 signatures and addresses all
that's required not yes or no and get 50
signatures the PTA could get 50
signatures the RTC get
monst so you say but my question is I'm
trying to look at both sides here and
not helping I'm trying to ask if the
petition process is something that can
be looked at and changed and that way
you get to our board meeting in our
board meeting we choose to push anything
back to the the charter revision
commission yes it can be potentially
amended I have a question about that as
well because I was reading all this
stuff to be prepared for this meeting my
understanding and maybe I missed it in
one of the meetings was that after after
the ordinance is agreed upon the town's
people get a letter and then they have
20 days right which I didn't actually
get for this meeting today but um um and
then they can send it back saying yeah I
don't like that whatever so that in
itself is not the petition process that
is the petition so if if 7 or 700 people
send those cards back and say no that
that's the petition the way is there be
petition form in the Tom clerk's office
or any organization can go this getes to
the Tom clerk's office this letter right
it takes seven days the board of Select
has a meeting they vote on it this
mailer goes out from the to it then
getss mailed to every resident within
the community the town clerk's office
gets one of these the town clerk stance
their mailing you have 20 days from the
date that the mailing was received by
the Tom clerk to get 50 signatures oh 50
signatures for 20 days once it gets
there and then it goes immediately to
referendum it does not go into it does
not become implemented nothing happens
it then goes to referend okay that's
part I didn't
understand so I could see anything on
have done
yeah well I mean I I said
[Music]
but I want to just address to Bob Amber
about the town court D you're good thank
you the uh Carol Lee did not commit to
um say she was for the appointed
position she told me she was uncommitted
okay so she I appreciate Jeff's uh
clarification and the the the the way
that he St St it was clear she voted to
advance the item
further
I's a microphone we need it we got
$20,000 to do a study but we can't we a
PA in this
place reques
,000 I'm Catherine hson I live on Bunker
Hill Road and I have allergies so excuse
me if I have to keep clearing my throat
I was going to address this last but
because it was the last topic before we
got up here I'll address it and maybe I
again refer to it at the
end as was just indicated that if an
ordinance is
passed then the town can repeal it by
filing the
appropriate petition to
repeal and it does require the 50 signat
at this
point and if that's the case then the
referendum is held but I'm going to read
you from the ordinance
itself the ordinance shall stand
approved by the referendum unless a
majority of the electors voting shall
have voted in favor of repealing such
ordinance provided however that at least
10% of the register voters of the
Town shall have voting on the matter any
ordinance not so repealed shall take
effect the next day now I read that to
me excuse
me this what roughly over a little over
2,000 so even though the 50 signatures
are obtained approved by the verified by
the town cler goes to the board of
Selectmen and they set the
referendum an affirmative vote to repeal
at that town meeting at that referendum
isn't enough
unless more than the uh 10% of the
registered voters at that point have
participated so let's just take for
example it's 220 is % and there are 219
of us voting there and we all vote to
repeal that ordinance would not
be um can I have one thing for you um
any referendum has to occur in the May
or November election no special
referendum dates no no special dates so
it's not immediately it's not
immediately it's at the next election or
the
next it
go
right what Jeff was saying there's no
election there's a budget referendum May
there could be an ordinance that's
attempted to be passed by the board
elect that the residents the town
residents want to repeal 50 signatures
goes referendum it would be on a budget
vote or on the state election in
November no other time I understand I
use the term refer vote on that ref is
using language that the
yeah yeah and I would sit there and and
go it's two let's say it's 200 I don't
think we've had less than 200 voters at
one of those elections
ever yes oh
[Music]
yes budg we you show
up got show up my experience is people
are interest they show off right
right all right so
I to speak about the um portion of the
proposed Charter revision dealing with
the town meeting that is the ordinance
of adoption ordinances now we all
learned I'm sure in our first students
class somewhere along the line that
there three branches of government in
the United
States the judicial the elective and the
legislative branch
here in Andor as you all know the town
meeting is our legislative
branch that's you and I that's you and I
and every elector in this town we're the
legislative branch in this
town and we come to a town
meeting and where we present we ask
questions we listen to what other people
have to
say and we have our say
and then we vote and
sometimes hopefully most of the time it
goes the way we vote but if it
doesn't and we don't it doesn't go the
way we vote it's still the process it's
still the process by which we all get a
chance to participate even though we
always don't win so to speak
a t a long time I think we do a pretty
good job I think we do a pretty good job
here in the
young now there are times when maybe 25
people show up but 25 people are 25
people out of let's say the 20 2,000 or
so electors that are privileged to be
able to come to that
meeting but we had the opportunity maybe
we chose not to because it wasn't
interested in care one way or the other
but it's also been my experience to see
so many people want you to transfer the
town to a larger facility we all see
that so why should we give up why do we
want to give up our right to have a say
on the laws that are governing our
town as I said a minute ago as we
started
before
um again to repeat the revision this
proposed would take that right away from
us they proposed uh provision in the
ordinance as we started out I started
out with
it call first we said that filing of the
the um
for
exor and yeah that's and um the board of
s as I said are required to hold a
special re special
referendum and I'm repeating myself
because this is what I was going to
finish up with but I started with that
means as I said before there that one
short of 10% of the
electors let's say 220 219 has come and
vote but we haven't met that 10% that
that provision is going to stand and
become the law here the next
day why do we want to give up the right
it's very very important right
[Applause]
I've heard a lot of good things tonight
and I agree I do not want to give up my
power and my choice of voting and
expressing my opinion I don't want
someone making it for me I don't want
things decided for
me I'm very in favor of town meetings
and
referendums um some of you I think know
that I went door too and got 130
signatures to have a study done about
regionalization well little did I know
it wasn't an
official um petition and so it was
denied and never went anywhere and I
wasted my time I never want to have to
go through that
again and I think it's unfair to say oh
signatures no I I'm very much opposed to
that and I'm not sure how I feel about
elected or appointed Carol Lee I'd like
to see appointed you know uh I'd like to
see promoted within
locally that can't happen I guess at
this point or to have someone from town
brought up to the ranks and qualified
and tutored and and and
assisted and that's all I have to say
thank
[Applause]
you 12 maybe this is question the rest
in the last how many
minces what is the definition of what's
the definition we don't have a
definition definition but it's not very
good it's in
the
a everything that we voted we've gone
four maybe
five hi I'm lean Hutchinson um Bunker
Hill Road um I'm not going to bring up
anything new because everything that I
wanted to state has been covered I just
want to say that I have followed the
process I've attended several of the
charter review Zoom committee meetings
I've spoken during public speak and I've
read um up on all the minutes of
meetings I wasn't able to attend and I
want to express my agreement with some
of the points that have been brought up
tonight including not taking any
legislative power away from the town
meeting um I think people who get
themselves quote unquote to a town
meeting deserve the attention that that
brings um I've been to town meetings
where things went my way and other times
where I didn't agree with the final
result but at least it's the New England
Democratic um format that people have
fought and died so that we can show up
and express our opinion um I also don't
agree with the process what I consider a
long process is proposed for repealing
an ordinance I think it's
cumbersome um to wait until the next
referendum and I also just want to um
also express my opinion that having
followed this process the beginning I'm
not completely sure how it originated in
the first place I I just don't think
it's necessary the way it's proposed um
so those I just wanted to say for the
record that those are the main points
that have already been stated that I
agree with
thanks all right
second so this document has an awful lot
of changes proposed in it and I just
want to talk a little bit about CU what
I don't want to see is everybody thrown
out cuz everybody's pissed about a
couple portions of
this so number one the state several
years ago pretty much required all the
towns to go to uh elections in the fall
and over for many years had spring
elections we no longer do um there's a
very cumbersome process to get back to
the possibility of May elections which I
don't think we as a town want to go
through so we out of we ought to make
the charter change to officially codify
that elections will be in November
because our Charter says one thing and
state law says another thing so we
should change that section in the
charter which is section 203 general
elections um you can make a decision
whether or not the town clerk uh
position is included in that um that's
uh neither here nor there so that makes
sense the second thing is section 210
which covers early voting again that is
state law we are simply making the
charter in that section match what state
law is and that state law now says early
voting is a thing so regardless of
whether we have it in our Charter or not
we're obligated to do it so we might as
well make our Charter uh
consistent um as far as the town budget
meeting goes the I think the the goal
there really was to drive voter
participation at the
referenda because the reality is we have
usually two budget votes a week apart
one for Ram one for the town budget we
typically get what a little less than
5% of the electorate votes on the ram
budget so 5% of the
taxpayers vote on
40% of the Town
spending by combining those two together
and having one vote at least initially
that covers both budgets I think the
goal was to get more people out to vote
you know so we get a higher turnout and
it's more representative of what people
actually want so I think that to me is a
worthwhile thing to
consider um the second thing is right
now there's no
no lower limit on
leases um you know at which it doesn't
have to go to town meeting okay so that
means a $200 a year lease for the thing
in the town clerk's office that runs the
postage through the media that
technically has to go to town meeting
and there are lots and lots of things
like that now I mean if you look at it
objectively there's 20 or 30 things that
either us uh as a town or the Board of
Education would have to go to town
meeting for because we have no lower
threshold on that so that's frankly dumb
um because you know there's that's just
too many things I don't think most of
you really care you know that we're
spending a couple hundred dollar a year
to lease the the postage machine at
least I would hope you uh don't you
would consider that a normal cost of
business so you threat set that
threshold high enough so that when we go
to buy something expensive or lease
something expensive like a plow truck or
something of that nature that you all
get to say and weigh in on it and you
leave the little stuff to the board of
finance and board of Selectmen to
approve so in my opinion and that makes
sense to allow that uh that change in
the charter um to go
through um so that is section
304e uh under
leases and the other one is
prance so um how many of you here have
had a hand in writing one of the
Hartford foundation for public giving
grants any of go to town meeting to
accept that did you go to town meeting
to accept that did you no we didn't
because practically there's too many
little grants that run through this town
and that's all funding that we get from
the state that we use to lower taxes and
get things done in the town um so going
to public meeting for a big Grant
absolutely appropriate if we're going to
spend you know a big chunk of your tax
dollars absolutely
that to go to town meeting you should
absolutely have a say it but the little
stuff I mean you know the the old
Cemetery Association pretty much every
year they go for a grant for maintaining
the headstones well so but the town also
budgets money in that line item so
technically every single year we should
be going to town meeting for that and
there are many things in that category
so I would urge you to pass that just as
a reasonable governance change what
number is that uh that
is 304 G which is participation in any
federal state or private grant program
um so that one I think is
worth the town pursuing obviously some
of these other things are
controversial um the other one
is Administrative positions So currently
uh under Section 702 d and e those are
two positions that the town right now
doesn't exactly line up with the charter
in the case of the director of Health it
says we shall appoint the director of
Health as mandated by the state of
Connecticut well in that that person is
a part-time employee well we're part of
a Regional Health Organization we're
part of Eastern Highlands health
district I'm on the board of directors
of that I'm also on the Executive Board
of that
organization so that's a shared service
that we are part of
but they're not Town employees so our
Charter does not match what we actually
do so I would urge you to accept Section
702 for administrative positions excuse
me how how would you go about that then
if we're Regional with P of Eastern
health do you change that to the board
select will appoint the director of
health because that's because all the
board of Selectmen it just ratifies the
fact that we use Eastern Highlands
health district the only thing you're
strike we're not adding anything we're
basically striking the fact that it says
the director of health is employed
part-time in the town because he is not
a town employee he's an employee of
Eastern Highlands health district but we
don't Point them either I mean should
that I guess my question is should we be
restating that entire because we don't
we don't employ them I don't think that
we've ever actually um followed our CH
so we voted we voted years ago to join
Eastern Highlands health district when
they were expanded um and we've been a
part of that organization ever since
right um we pay into it we're part of
the governing body that um and we get a
lot of really good service both us and
the school so to me that makes sense the
second thing is Animal control officer
um currently we use nikog which is the
Northeast Council of government's animal
control services to cover the town um as
opposed to having our own and there's
two parts to that the first is the state
changed the laws several years ago
regarding Animal Control fac facilities
and the cost to take our what was our
animal control facility and make it uh
meet state law is really expensive so we
don't really have any intention of going
back to having our own Animal control
officer and own animal control facility
um you
know technically today Animal Control
facilities have to be air conditioned um
they have an awful lot of standards that
we we frankly can't meet without beating
building a standalone facility for that
so by changing that this the charter
says that we're going to have our own
officer all this Charter change does is
allow us to use a shared service for
that so I think you should uh pass that
I think that's reasonable and that
matches what we actually do for
governments um and then the changes to
the way the budget runs just what I want
to say right now is our our Charter
currently calls that out kind of two
different ways so obviously the board of
Finance has final Authority for the
budget that goes to the public but what
happens is prior to the start of the
budget process each department head gets
uh submits a budget each department head
each commission submits a budget to the
town to both myself and the finance
director they all get collated into a
budget and then get reviewed that gets
passed out to the board of Selectmen and
board of Finance so most of what's in
here is what we're actually doing now is
actually the way the process works for
the most part the board of Finance is
not doing what they used to do which is
they used to hear from each individual
Department themselves and they collated
the budget and came up with the final
budget so with with the switch to a Town
Administrator part of that role has
shifted to myself and who we have for a
finance director um so that's to me that
makes sense but maybe it doesn't make
sense to you um and that's pretty much
all I have in terms of what I wanted to
say so what I would say is just please
don't throw out the baby with the
Backwater there are sections here you
may be incredibly opposed to and that's
fine but there's a bunch of things that
are just governance changes that make
sense to be adopted so that's it
thanks can I ask a question about the
$50,000 lease option
304 a 5e piece of equipment from Public
Works a small piece of equipment public
work that is being leased over a 5e ter
would represent a $50,000 item that
still has to go to budget and you have
to realize that that
$50,000 is if we call we we we would
have to call just like we did with the
mower that just went up in front of town
meeting we would have to call a special
town meeting to have a vote on a piece
of equipment that would be
$5,000 and right now I think Eric what's
it $5,000 or $2,000 there actually
there's no Lim so anys so it it's it's
not it's not something that's included
in the normal budget because you would
get to vote on that you know at
referendum and be able to speak about it
it's if we if the board of Select called
a special meeting on a lease that they
wanted to enact that's outside the
budget for
$50,000 it technically is not really
going to occur very often but it's just
setting a different pressure
Marcy I just have a question Marcy minor
lri what is the process for when uh the
town clerk wants to leave her position
or
um say we hire a new one and find it
maybe the town's people aren't happy
with a new person what would be the
process of that
person
going well right now we can't because
town clerk is elected official and the
town clerk is statuto required you know
has rules There are rules that the local
government can't just go after the Town
Clerk and ask the town clerk to leave
the town clerk could resign and that's a
full other issue I don't ever want to
deal
with please please let me go before that
happens because I don't know what we
would
do we'd have to have special election
we'd have a special election one in town
who the Democratic town committee and
the Republican Town committee approved
would run off for the the town clerk's
position that's what we and that that
could be
challenging and and Jeff that's whether
they're qualified or
not a political ARA there's no
qualifications for that I mean listen
the town clerk's position for everybody
that's going it is no different than
what we did with the town administrat
replacing with first selectman uh you
know uh administrative Authority because
you can never be guaranteed that the
person sitting in the first selectman's
chair has the capabilities to do that
job effectively for the town's residents
that's why we did it so you all voted
for that there's no difference in the
town clerk's position than the town
administrator's
position it not
necess you can sit there and say you
want some to vote for but Catherine
think of the Democratic town committee
who are you putting up for that job
that's qualified to do that job
effectively for the residents of down
not the 50 people that are here at this
meeting but the other 2500 residents
that need the town cler Services who is
the Democratic town putting up for that
job you got any ideas here's my question
though this this to answer that is
you're talking a political versus
professional so that's what I had asked
or what I had said before when someone
was saying something that currently she
is an elected position but she has an
autonomy there because she doesn't
answer directly to the Town
Administrator or anyone else if I if you
now uh appoint her if you now hire
someone that person of course has no
autonomy that person is going to have to
politically speaking I'm just
professionally is different but the town
little town politics is little town
politics and that's not going to change
so that position is no longer ton that
position is now going to be involved in
the political process of the Town
administrating the town ER Anderson one
side Eric Anderson's position is a
political position right it's it's it's
appointed by the board every every two
years not every four years every two
years we have to renew Eric's
contract this board could sit there and
say they want Eric out right right and
we could we could vote him out and then
have to hire and politically do it a
why who wants to go through that Eric
don't ever
me you're doing a great job for this
grw don't forget we're not talking about
Carol we're talking the town thir
Carol's not going to you know she's not
going to want to be the town thir
forever we're going to have to have
another new person and I feel like we've
gotten lucky having Carol and we might
not get lucky having someone
say the same thing I feel like you know
we had some positions in the town office
that were very difficult to fill we've
hired people that didn't work out if
they were elected we would have had a
Jim Dandy of a time getting rid of them
when the person is appointed there's
qualifications and expectations that
come along that they have to meet that
if they don't meet them we can move on
to the correct person in the job and you
got to take Carol Lee out of it you got
to look at the position and what's best
to move the town forward and keep things
going the new town cler whoever he or
she may be has state regulations and
laws that they will have to adhere to as
Eric had mentioned but they should be an
appointed position and not an elected
political position based on
qualifications
is there anyone who has not spoken that
would like to speak one time
Eric and and Louise is there anyone else
that has not spoken
much l is going to go next anybody else
I want on the record right now
anybody anybody all right Lise you get
the last word all right
Eric
chefen still Eric
chefen and I still live on
bu I served on the r Board of
Ed and one of our most difficult
assignments was to hire a new
superintendent for that school that is a
big big
position it's huge for the future of
that
school we have a we had a board of 11
people and we
spent literally months working on this
issue getting it down from 11 terrific
applicants to six and now how are we
going to get it to three and now how are
we going
get it to a point where we can have a
vote on this right
so the effort that we put into that to
to select the best possible
candidate is
uh a great multiple on what would happen
if it was simply a vote if a bunch of
people just applied and there was a list
to vote how are people going to know
know who the most qualified person is
right so you know so with people on
boards our wonderful board here that
works hard for
us we have a we have a democratic vote I
agree with that right but when you're
when you're hiring a professional and it
seems to me that carolene is a
professional that we need to have a
group of people look deeply into the the
people who are applying for this job and
and use their Collective judgment in
selecting the best person and see you
say well how would why did I get that
why why did I deserve that
responsibility it's because you put me
there that's how it works so you know I
I'm just trying to speak in in support
of
appointing a person here where um you're
able to look deeply into uh who is
applied and and have a good group of
people make a a selection on behalf of
the town's people who voted them into
that position to do
that thank you
[Applause]
goodwi Lakeside Drive like to make a
motion tojn this
[Applause]
meeting let everybody know we have
another quick meeting after
this we're adjourning the public hearing
everybody voting this vote
all right you conratulations
[Music]